Creating application security checklist (#46326)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/security/application-security-checklist.md

Reviewer: - This page needs a third party links disclaimer; see https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#third-party-content-marker
- API verbs like **apply** and **create** are written as lower case bold. We use upper case non bold when documenting verbs at the underlying HTTP level (eg OPTIONS, PUT, GET).

- (nit) When a sentence ends with a period, ie `.`, don't include the period inside the anchor text of a hyperlink.

  - [ ] CPU limit might be set on sensitive workloads.

## Pod level configurations
Configure {{< glossary_tooltip text="Security Context" term_id="Security-Context" >}} for the pod-container.
- [ ] `automountServiceAccountToken` should be set to `false` unless the pod specifically requires access to the Kubernetes API to operate.

### Pod SecurityContext
- [ ] Set `runAsNonRoot: true`.
- [ ] Configure User permissions and access controls using `runAsUser` and `runAsGroup`.
- [ ] Optionally add a supplimentary group with `fsGroup` to access persistent volumes.
- [ ] Appropriate Pod Security Standard policies are enforced to all pods in the application namespace.

### Container Security Context
- [ ] Disable privilege escalations using `allowPrivilegeEscalation: false`.
- [ ] Configure the root filesystem to be read-only with `readOnlyRootFilesystem: true`.
- [ ] Avoid running privileged containers with `privileged: false`.
- [ ] [Set appropriate Seccomp profiles.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#set-the-seccomp-profile-for-a-container)
- [ ] [Configure appropriate AppArmor policies.](/docs/tutorials/security/apparmor/)

> - [ ] [Assign appropriate SELinux labels to the contianers.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#assign-selinux-labels-to-a-container)

Reviewer 2: little typo
```suggestion
- [ ] [Assign appropriate SELinux labels to the containers.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#assign-selinux-labels-to-a-container)
```

- [ ] Drop all capabilities from the containers, and add back only specific ones that are needed for operation of the container.

## Role Based Access Control (RBAC)
- [ ] Permissions such as `create`, `patch`, `update` and `delete` should be only granted if necessary.
- [ ] Avoid creating RBAC permissions to create or update roles which can lead to [privilege escalation](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#privilege-escalation-prevention-and-bootstrapping).

> The `create`, `update` and `delete` are generally agreed upon to be used judicously. The `patch` permission can [allow users to update labels on the namespace or deployments](/docs/concepts/security/rbac-good-practices/#namespace-modification) making them more vulnarable.

Reviewer 2: Another typo here, not a fan either of "making them more vulnerable", maybe something like "allowing them to escalate privilege" or something less stronger but more conveyor of the "attack" sense? Not sure.
```suggestion
The `create`, `update` and `delete` are generally agreed upon to be used judicously. The `patch` permission can [allow users to update labels on the namespace or deployments](/docs/concepts/security/rbac-good-practices/#namespace-modification) making them more vulnerable.
```

## Runtime Classes
- [ ] Configure appropriate runtime classes for containers.

> Some containers may require a different isolation level from what is provided by the the default runtime of the cluster. `runtimeClassname` can be used in a podspec to define a differnt runtime class.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can develop here without linking to existing solutions (or maybe we can for CNCF projects?). Explaining that you can use virtualization, or kernel emulation like gvisor, for very sensitive workloads where you need stronger boundaries.

Author: Added a mention about using gVisor, kata-containers and confidential virtual machines. 👍

{{< /caution >}}

<!-- body -->

## Application design
- [ ] Following the right [design principles for the application.](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2018/03/principles-of-container-app-design/)
- [ ] Application configured with appropriate {{< glossary_tooltip text="QoS class" term_id="QoS-class" >}} through resource request and limits
  - [ ] Memory limit is set for the workloads with a limit equal or inferior to the request.
  - [ ] CPU limit might be set on sensitive workloads.

## Pod level configurations
Configure {{< glossary_tooltip text="Security Context" term_id="Security-Context" >}} for the pod-container.

### Pod SecurityContext
- [ ] Set `runAsNonRoot: true`.
- [ ] Configure User permissions and access controls using `runAsUser` and `runAsGroup`.
- [ ] Optionally add a supplementary group with `fsGroup` to access persistent volumes.
- [ ] Appropriate Pod Security Standard policies are enforced on all application namespace pods.

### Container Security Context

> - [ ] Disable privilege escalations using `allowPrivilegeEscalation: true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [ ] Disable privilege escalations using `allowPrivilegeEscalation: false`.
```

- [ ] Configure the root filesystem to be read-only with `readOnlyRootFilesystem: true`.
- [ ] Avoid running privileged containers with `privileged: false`.
- [ ] [Set appropriate Seccomp profiles.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#set-the-seccomp-profile-for-a-container)
- [ ] [Configure appropriate AppArmor policies.](/docs/tutorials/security/apparmor/)
- [ ] [Assign appropriate SELinux labels to the containers.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#assign-selinux-labels-to-a-container)

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [ ] Drop all capabilities from the containers, and add back only specific ones that are needed for operation of the container
```

---
title: Application Security Checklist
description: >

>   Baseline checklist for ensuring application security for Kubernetes Developers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Baseline guidelines around ensuring application security on Kubernetes, aimed at application developers
```

<!-- The following is taken from the existing checklist created for Kubernetes admins. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/security-checklist/ -->

On how to read and use this document:

- The order of topics does not reflect an order of priority.
- Some checklist items are detailed in the paragraph below the list of each section.
- This checklist assumes a `developer` is a Kubernetes cluster user that interacts with namespaced scope objects.

{{< caution >}}
Checklists are **not** sufficient for attaining a good security posture on their own. A good security posture requires constant attention and improvement, but a checklist can be the first step on the never-ending journey towards security preparedness. Some of the recommendations in this checklist may be too restrictive or too lax for your specific security needs. Since Kubernetes security is not "one size fits all", each category of checklist items should be evaluated on its merits.
{{< /caution >}}

<!-- body -->
## Base security hardening
The following checklist provide a base security hardening recommendations that would apply to most applications deploying to Kubernetes.

### Application design

> - [ ] Following the right [design principles for the application.](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2018/03/principles-of-container-app-design/)

Reviewer: I don't recommend linking to that article. Find a better source, such as https://www.cncf.io/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf

- [ ] Application configured with appropriate {{< glossary_tooltip text="QoS class" term_id="QoS-class" >}} through resource request and limits
  - [ ] Memory limit is set for the workloads with a limit equal or inferior to the request.
  - [ ] CPU limit might be set on sensitive workloads.

### Service account

> - [ ] Avoid using `default` service account. Create service accounts for workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Avoid using the `default` ServiceAccount. Create ServiceAccounts for each workload or microservice.
```

- [ ] `automountServiceAccountToken` should be set to `false` unless the pod specifically requires access to the Kubernetes API to operate.

> ### Pod Security Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pod-level `securityContext` recommendations {#security-context-pod}
```

- [ ] Set `runAsNonRoot: true`.

> - [ ] Configure User permissions and access controls using `runAsUser` and `runAsGroup`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Configure the container to execute as a less privileged user (for example, using
      `runAsUser` and `runAsGroup`), and configure appropriate permissions on files or directories
      inside the container image.
```

> - [ ] Optionally add a supplimentary group with `fsGroup` to access persistent volumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Optionally add a supplementary group with `fsGroup` to access persistent volumes.
```

> - [ ] Appropriate Pod Security Standard policies are enforced to all pods in the application namespace.

Reviewer: Maybe this:
```suggestion
- [ ] The application deploys into a namespace that enforces an appropriate _Pod security standard_.
      If you cannot control this enforcement for the cluster(s) where the application is deployed,
      take this into account either through documentation or additional defense in depth.
```

> ### Container Security Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Container-level `securityContext` recommendations {#security-context-container}

```

- [ ] Disable privilege escalations using `allowPrivilegeEscalation: false`.
- [ ] Configure the root filesystem to be read-only with `readOnlyRootFilesystem: true`.

> - [ ] Avoid running privileged containers with `privileged: false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Avoid running privileged containers (set `privileged: false`).
```

- [ ] Drop all capabilities from the containers, and add back only specific ones that are needed for operation of the container.

> ### Role Based Access Control (RBAC)

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
### Role Based Access Control (RBAC) {#rbac}

These suggestions apply if your cluster uses
Kubernetes [RBAC](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/)
for authorization, or for applications that need to work across different kinds of cluster.

```

- [ ] Permissions such as `create`, `patch`, `update` and `delete` should be only granted if necessary.
- [ ] Avoid creating RBAC permissions to create or update roles which can lead to [privilege escalation](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#privilege-escalation-prevention-and-bootstrapping).
- [ ] Review bindings for the `system:unauthenticated` group and remove them where possible, as this gives access to anyone who can contact the API server at a network level.

> The `create`, `update` and `delete` should be used judicously. The `patch` permission can [allow users to update labels on the namespace or deployments](/docs/concepts/security/rbac-good-practices/#namespace-modification) which can increase the attack surface.

Reviewer: Try this:
```suggestion
The **create**, **update** and **delete** verbs should be permitted judiciously. The **patch** verb if allowed on a Namespace can
[allow users to update labels on the namespace or deployments](/docs/concepts/security/rbac-good-practices/#namespace-modification) which can increase the attack surface.

For sensitive workloads, consider providing a recommended ValidatingAdmissionPolicy that further restricts the permitted write actions.
```

### Image security
- [ ] Using a image scanning tool the scan an image before deploying containers in the Kubernetes cluster.
- [ ] Use container signing to validate the container image signature before deploying to the Kubernetes cluster.

### Network Policies

> - [ ] Configure network policies to only allow expected ingress and egress traffic from the pods.

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
- [ ] Configure [NetworkPolicies](/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/)
      to only allow expected ingress and egress traffic from the pods.
      Make sure that your cluster provides and enforces NetworkPolicy. If you are writing an application
      that people will deploy to different clusters, consider whether you can assume that NetworkPolicy
      is available and enforced.
```

> ## Advanced Security Hardening

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Advanced security hardening {#advanced}

```

This section of this guide covers some advanced security hardening points which might be valuable based on different Kubernetes environment setup

### Linux container security

> Configure {{< glossary_tooltip text="Security Context" term_id="Security-Context" >}} for the pod-container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Configure a {{< glossary_tooltip text="securityContext" term_id="Security-Context" >}} for the pod and / or container.
```

- [ ] [Set appropriate Seccomp profiles.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#set-the-seccomp-profile-for-a-container)
- [ ] [Configure appropriate AppArmor policies.](/docs/tutorials/security/apparmor/)

> - [ ] [Assign appropriate SELinux labels to the contianers.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#assign-selinux-labels-to-a-container)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [Assign appropriate SELinux labels to the containers.](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#assign-selinux-labels-to-a-container)
```

### Runtime Classes
- [ ] Configure appropriate runtime classes for containers.

Some containers may require a different isolation level from what is provided by the default runtime of the cluster. `runtimeClassname` can be used in a podspec to define a differnt runtime class.

> For sensitive workloads consider using Kernel emulation tools like [gVisor](https://gvisor.dev/docs/) or [kata-containers](https://katacontainers.io/).

Reviewer: Kata containers is not a kernel emulator:
```suggestion
For sensitive workloads consider using kernel emulation tools like [gVisor](https://gvisor.dev/docs/), or virtualized isolation using a mechanism such as [kata-containers](https://katacontainers.io/).
```

> In high trust environments, consider using [confidential virutal machines](/blog/2023/07/06/confidential-kubernetes/) to improve cluster security even further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In high trust environments, consider using [confidential virtual machines](/blog/2023/07/06/confidential-kubernetes/) to improve cluster security even further.
```

Watch out for linking to non-evergreen blog articles (anything that gets marked as out of date once at least a year old).
